Banadir zone primary and secondary schools
Biology form four:
Chapter questions and their answers.
Ch1: Answers all of the following questions for each pair of terms explain the
relationship between the terms:
1. a. Stimulants and depressants
b. Motor neuron and sensory receptor
c. Brain stem and diencephalon
d. Resting potential and action potential
• Stimulant: are drugs that speed up the activity of central nervous system while
depressant: are drugs slow down your brain function.
• Sensory receptor: relay information from external sensory receptors to the central
nervous system while motor neuron: relay information from the central nervous system
to the skeletal muscles.
• Brain stem: is the distal part of the brain that consists of midbrain, pons and medulla
oblongata while diencephalon is the region of the brain that connects cerebrum and
midbrain it consists of thalamus and hypothalamus.
• Resting potential is non-conducting nerve fibre while an action potential is a localized
change in the resting membrane potential B/w the inside and outside of the nerve fibre
caused by stimulus.
2. Use each of the following terms in a separate sentence neuron, dendrites, myelin sheath,
axon and synapse.
• Neurons: are the working units of the nervous system that generate and transmit nerve
impulse or is the basic functional unit of the nervous system.
• Dendrites: receives impulse from another neuron and carry toward cell body.
• Myelin sheath: is a fatty material that insulates the axon.
• Axons: carries nerve impulse away from cell body to other neuron and muscles.
• Synapse: is the junction between dendrites of two adjacent neurons.
3. Use each of the following terms in a separate sentence thalamus, hypothalamus, pons
and medulla oblongata.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
• Thalamus: consists of two masses of gray and white matter situated with in the cerebral
hemisphere just below the corpus callosum.
• Hypothalamus: is a small but important structure and it’s situated below the thalamus.
• Pons: is situated in front of the cerebellum, below the midbrain and above medulla
oblongata.
• Medulla oblongata: is the most interior region of the brain stem.
4. The word roots and origin the word pons is derived from the Latin pons, which means
bridge using this information explain how pons is an appropriate term for the part of the
brain it describes?
• The word of pons is the Latin word and important region of the brain that relay nerve
impulse from the forebrain to the cerebellum.
5. Discuss the structure of a neuron?
a. Dendrites: receives nerve impulse from other neuron and carry toward cell body.
b. Cell body: connects dendrites and axon also contains nucleus and cell organelles.
c. Axon: carry nerve impulse away from cell body to the other neurons and muscles.
d. Myelin sheath: insulates the axon.
e. Schwann cells: secretes myelin sheath.
f. Node of Ranvier: increases speed of impulse.
g. Axon terminal: is the end of axon contains vesicles full neurotransmitter
6. Describe the chemical conditions within neuron during resting potential and action
potential?
• Resting potential –there are more sodium ions outside the neuron and more potassium
inside neuron while Action potential-there are more potassium ions outside the neuron
and more sodium ions inside the neuron.
7. Explain how action potential are transmitted from neuron to another cell?
• Action potential- impulse travels the length of the axon and causes releases of
neurotransmitters into the synapse through which two neurons communicate.
8. Describes the roles of the two main organs of the central nervous system?
• Brain controls all functions of the body such as our thoughts, learning, memory, and
speech, temperature, water balance, sleep, appetite, heartbeat, respiration, sense organs
and etc. It also controls movements of the arms and legs.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
• Spinal cord: transfer nervous information between the brain and other parts of the body
except head region. It also controls simple reflex action.
9. Define the roles of four portions of the brain?
• Functions of Cerebrum: controls such activities: Memory, Thinking, Leaning, Problem
solving, Reasoning, and five senses and therefore controls voluntary movements.
• Functions of Diencephalon: Processing center for sensory information and autonomic
control. Regulates body temperature, water balance and metabolism, Regulates of
endocrine system. Controls: pleasure, fear, thirst, pain, and etc.
• Functions of Brain stem: Connecting cerebrum and cerebellum to the spinal cord.
Controls many involuntary functions such as: heart rate, breathing rate, body temperature,
sneezing vomiting, swallowing, coughing, digestion, sleep and etc.
• Functions of Cerebellum: Controls and coordinates muscular movements,
Maintenance body balance pasture and equilibrium
10. Summarize the roles of sensory and motor division of the peripheral nervous system?
• Sensory division of the PNS: carries sensory information from the body to the central
nervous system while Motor division of the PNS: carries nerve impulse from the central
nervous system to the muscles and glands.
11.Relate the relationship between motor neurons, interneurons and sensory receptors?
• Sensory neuron (afferent): get information about what is going on inside and outside of
the body and bring that information in to the brain and spinal cord.
• Motor neuron (efferent): get information from brain or spinal cord and convey to the
effector organs.
• Interneuron (relay neuron, connector, associative, intermediate): which are found only
in the brain and spinal cord, connect one neuron to another.
12.Describe the role of chemoreceptors in taste and smell?
Chemoreceptors: respond chemicals responsible for senses of taste and smell.
13. List five different types of sensory receptors in the human body?
• Receptors in the eye, receptors in the tongue, receptors in the nose, receptors in the ear,
receptors in the skin.
14.Identify the parts of the ear responsible for hearing and for balance?
• Cochlea responsible for hearing while semicircular canals responsible for balance.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
15.Compare how rods and cones response to light?
• Rods are light sensitive cells that are excited by low levels of light while Cone’s function
in bright light and provide information about color to the brain.
16.Describe how the eye receives light stimuli and sends a signal to the brain?
• The light first enter by cornea, pupil and the lens through vitreous humor in the retina the
photoreceptor cells called rods and cones send stimuli the brain via optic nerve.
17.State the types of receptors that function in taste and smell?
• Chemoreceptors
18.Explain the role of skin sensing touch, temperature and pain?
• Thousands of nerve endings in the skin respond to –touch, temperature and pain or there
are many receptors in the skin that respond touch, temperature and pain.
19.State the types and roles of the peripheral nervous system?
• Types of peripheral nervous system are cranial nerve and spinal nerves also sensory
nerves and motor nerves.
• Motor nerves are divided by somatic nervous system and autonomic nervous system.
The autonomic nervous system is classified into sympathetic and parasympathetic. 
Function of peripheral nervous system: its main function is to connect the CNS to the
rest of the body.
20.Outline the disease of the nervous system?
• Dementia
• Alzheimer disease
• Meningitis
• Poliomyelitis’s • Epilepsy and Stroke
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
Ch2: answer all of the following questions
1. How do the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland interact to control the release of some
of the hormones in the endocrine system?
2. List six major endocrine glands and the function of these glands.
3. How do feedback mechanisms help maintain homeostasis?
4. How do negative feedback mechanisms differ from positive feedback mechanisms?
5. Compare the effects of glucagon and insulin on blood glucose levels.
6. Name four functions of hormones.
7. How do endocrine glands differ from exocrine glands?
8. Explain how most amino acid–based hormones affect their target cells.
9. Explain how steroid and thyroid hormones affect their target cells.
10. Explain why the pancreas is considered to be both an exocrine gland and an endocrine
gland.
11. Why pituitary gland is called the master gland?
12. Describe the conditions of gigantism and dwarfism, their causes and treatment methods.
13. Identify and describe the type of feedback mechanism operating in the diagram shown
below.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
Answers:
1. Hypothalamus and pituitary gland control the initial release of many hormones for the
endocrine system.
2.
• Pituitary gland: secrete a number of hormones that regulate a number of another
endocrine gland
• Pancreases: produce glucagon and insulin that regulate the level of sugar in the
blood
• Thyroid gland: produce thyroid hormone to regulate cellular metabolic rate,
heart rate blood pressure and etc.
• Parathyroid gland: produce parathyroid hormone that regulate too low of blood
calcium level
• Adrenal gland: produce hormone that regulate metabolism, immune system,
blood pressure and stress.
• Gonads: produce gametes and sex hormones
3. Feedback mechanism control hormone secretion
4. Negative feedback: is the last step in a series of events in habits the initial signal in the
series while positive feedback: is the release of initial hormone stimulates the release or
production of other hormones.
5. Glucagon stimulates release of glucose in to the blood stream while insulin lowers the
blood sugar levels.
6. Four main function of hormones are:
• Regulate body growth and development
• Regulate metabolism, reproduction and urine production
7. Endocrine glands: their hormones diffuse directly into the bloodstream while exocrine
glands: secrete substances through ducts (tube-like structures).
8. Amino acid hormones: must bind to receptors found on the plasma membrane of a target
cell because they cannot diffuse through the plasma membrane.
9. Steroid hormones are soluble in lipids and therefore can diffuse through the plasma
membrane of a target cell.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
10. Because pancreas release pancreatic hormone through the duct and secrete glucagon and
insulin in to the blood stream.
11. Because controls all the activities of endocrine glands.
12. In children who are still growing, too low growth hormone can cause a condition called
dwarfism. Can be controlled by injection synthetic growth hormone.
In children who are still growing, too much growth hormone can cause a condition
called gigantism. Can be controlled by surgery and medication.
13. Is the negative feedback and is a vital control mechanism for the body’s homeostasis.
Ch 3: ANSWER ALL OF THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS
1. Differentiate between
a. axial and appendicular skeletons,
b. bone and cartilage
c. exoskeleton and endoskeleton.
2. Describe the shapes of bones and bone formation.
3. Draw a labeled diagram of the structure of a long bone.
4. Identify the types of joints with respect to form and function.
5. Outline the functions of skeletal system.
6. Describe arthritis. What are the two common forms of arthritis? And which type of
arthritis is not related to age?
7. For healthy bones, sun exposure is advised, justify that.
8. What is osteoporosis?
9. What is the significance of synovial fluids?
10. What are the major kinds of joints in the human body?
11. Define ossification?
12. Compare between the types of muscles with respect to form and function.
13. Describe microscopic structure of striated muscle fibers.
14. Explain the mechanism of muscular contraction or the sliding filament theory.
15. Give an account of the common muscle injuries inflicted on football players.
16. Differentiate between fast-twitch and slow-twitch muscle
17. Contrast the functions of flexors and extensors.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
18. What causes muscles to become fatigued? And why do you think the heart muscle never
suffers from fatigue?
19. Explain briefly the structure and function of the skin
20. Describe the derivatives of skin
21. Identify two types of glands found in the skin, and describe their functions.
22. Describe the structure of nails and hairs.
23. Recognize the diseases and disorders of integumentary system
24. Identify the substance that prevents the hair and skin from drying out, and the gland
where this substance is produced.
Answers:
1. a) Axial skeleton is the part of the skeletal that consists of skull, vertebral column, ribs
and the sternum.
Appendicular skeleton is the part of skeleton that consists of bones of the shoulder,
arms, hands, hips, legs and feet
b) Bone is defined as connective tissue that has many shapes and size.
Cartilage is an elastic supportive tissue that consisting of specialized cells called
Chondrocytes
c) Exoskeleton are external to the soft tissues while Endoskeleton are internal.
2. Shapes of bones are long bone, short bone, irregular bone, flat bone and sesamoid bone
Formation of bone involves replacement of cartilage with bonny tissue
3.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
4. Fixed joint prevent movement
Semi-movable joints permit only limited movement.
All other joints in the body are movable joints.
5. a. Support
b. protection
c. formation of blood cells
d. Reservoir
e. Movement
6. Arthritis is an inflammation of the joint. The two common forms of arthritis are:
Osteoarthritis and Rheumatoid. Rheumatoid arthritis is not related to age
7. Sunlight: help bones for keeping the immune system health too and formation of vitamin D.
8. Osteoporosis is the condition in which bones become weak and break easily.
9. Synovial fluid reduce friction between joint during movement
10. Major kinds of joints are: a. Fixed joint b. Semi movable joint c. movable joint
11. the formation of bone from osteoblast is called Ossification
12. Skeletal muscle: Is voluntary muscle responsible for body movement
Cardiac muscle is involuntary muscle that pumps blood through the body
Smooth muscle is the involuntary muscle that protect internal organs
13. Sarcomere
14. Myosin have extensions shaped like oval “heads while actin filaments look like a twisted
strand of breads.
15. Muscle cramps, muscle fatigue, muscle strain, muscle tearing, and etc.
16. Slow twitch fibers have a rich capillary, more mitochondria and aerobic respiratory enzyme
and high concentration of myoglobin while Fast twitch fibers have fewer capillary and
mitochondria, not much myoglobin and aerobically respire
17. flexors is a muscle that pends a joint while extensor is a muscle that straightens a joint
18. impaired blood flow, iron imbalance and nerve fatigue.
Because cardiac muscle contains more mitochondria
19. Structure of the skin are dermis and epidermis while function of the skin is protection,
regulation of body temperature, formation of vitamin D, sensation, Excretion
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
20. Skin derivatives are: Sweat glands, Oil glands, Hairs, Nails.
21. Sebaceous or oil gland and Sweat glands.
• Sebaceous gland is oil secreting gland softening hair and skin.
• Sweat gland releases excessive water
22. Hair is made up of follicle, root and shaft While nails are made up of free edge, nail plate,
cuticle and lunula
23. Disorders in integumentary system include: Eczema, Acne, Seborrheic, Psoriasis, Cold sores
and etc.
24. Substance that prevents the hair and skin from drying out is Oil sebum and it is produced
from Sebaceous or Oil gland.
Ch4: Answer the following questions:
1. Name the three parts of a nucleotide.
2. State the base-pairing rules in DNA.
3. A template strand of DNA has the following sequence:
3′ – CGTTACCCGAGCCGTACGATTAGG – 5′
Use the sequence information to determine
a. The predicted sequence of the mRNA for this gene.
b. The predicted amino acid sequence of the protein.
4. What is the meaning of: genetic code, codon, anticodon, intron, exon, transcription and
translation?
5. Compare types of RNA according structure and function
6. Describe the role of helicases and DNA polymerases during DNA replication.
7. State why DNA replication is a semiconservative process.
8. Summarize the flow of genetic information.
9. Sequence the main steps of transcription.
10. List the four ways in which the structure of RNA differs from that of DNA.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
Answers:
1. Five carbon sugar, nitrogenous base and phosphate group
2. Adenine always equal thymine while guanine always equal cytosine
3. A template strand of DNA has the following sequence:
3′ – CGTTACCCGAGCCGTACGATTAGG – 5′
a) GCAAUGGGCUCGGCAUGCUAAUCC
b)
AL Meth Gly Serine AL Cys Stop Serine
4.
• The genetic code is a sequence of nucleotides in the DNA.
• Triple bases or nucleotides of the mRNA are called the codon.
• Three unpaired nucleotides are called anticodon.
• The introns are the (non-coding regions) while exons are the (coding regions).
• Tarnslation is the process of converting the information of mRNA (codons) into a
sequence of mino acids in the process of protein synthesis.
• Transcription is the process by which the genetic instructions in a specific gene are
transcribed or “rewritten” into an RNA molecule.
5.
• Messenger RNA (mRNA): this carries the instructions from a gene to make a
protein.
• Ribosomal RNA (rRNA): is the part of the structure of ribosomes which are made of
rRNAs and proteins.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
• Transfer RNA (tRNA) transfers amino acids to the ribosome to make a protein.
6. Helicase enzyme breaks double helix of DNA strands to separate while polymerase
enzyme binds new nucleotides with the older chain as complementary.
7. Because the original DNA molecule are produced.
8. (central dogma or genetic flow) concept can be symbolized as DNA RNA
protein.
9. Main steps of transcription are initiation, elongation and termination.
10.
DNA RNA
• Stores genetic information transfer genetic information
• Double strands single strands
• Contain thymine contain uracil
• Always found in nucleus mostly out of nucleus
Ch 5: Answer all of the following Questions
1. Explain the differences between the terms in the following sets.
i) Dominant and recessive ii) Genotype and phenotype
2) Which term describes a person who is heterozygous for a recessive disorder?
3) How is the inheritance pattern between parents and offspring represented diagrammatically?
4) Predict the genotypes of the children of a father with Huntington’s disease and an unaffected
mother.
Use the photo below to answer question 5
5) Describe a fetal test that results in the karyotype shown above
6) What characteristics are associated with Down syndrome
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
7) In pea plants, yellow seed color is the dominant trait, and green seed color is the recessive
trait. Use a Punnett square to show the results of a cross between a heterozygous yellow-seed
plant and a green-seed plant.
8) Based on your Punnett square from question 10, what percentage of the offspring would have
a homozygous genotype? Explain your answer.
9) Color blindness is caused by a sex-linked, recessive gene. If a woman, whose father was color
blind, marries a man with normal color vision, what percentage of their children will be color
blind? What percentage of male children’s female children?
10) Assume that the genes for seed color and seed shape are located on the same chromosome. A
plant heterozygous for both genes is testcrossed wrinkled green with the following results:
green, wrinkled 645
green, round 36
yellow, wrinkled 29
yellow, round 590
11) What were the genotypes of the parents, and how far apart are these genes?
Answers:
1. Dominant: is that which can express in both homozygous TT and heterozygous Tt.
Recessive: is that which can only express itself in its homozygous state tt.
Genotype: is the genetic make up while phenotype is the physical appearance.
2. It described carrier person.
3. Pedigree
4.
H h
h H h h h
H h hh
h
Two children are effected Huntington’s (Hh, Hh) where hh, hh are normal children.
5. Normal fetal.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
6. Characteristic of down syndrome are: mental retardation, short body, thick tongue, cardiac
malfunction and etc.
7.
Y y
y Yy yy
y Yy yy
2 yellow seeds (Yy, Yy and 2 green seeds yy, yy)
8. The percentage of the offspring would have a homozygous genotype question 10 are 50%
of homozygous genotype.
9.
XN Y
XN XN XN XNY
Xn XN Xn Xn Y
One son is color blind Xn Y or 25% as well as one female is carrier XN Xn or 25%
10.
RY ry
yr RrYy rryy
yr RrYy rryy
11. The genotypes of the parents are YyRr (yellow, round) and yyrr (green wrinkled)
and the distance between Y and R genes can be calculated using the formula: (number of
recombinant progeny/total number of progeny) *100 = (65/1300) * 100 equal number of
recombinant phenotypes.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
Ch 6: Answer all of the following questions
1. Define the following terms:
a. biotechnology
b. Plasmid
c. Genetic engineering
d. Transformation
2. List two types of medical products that can be produced using DNA technology.
3. Relate bioethics to the continued development of genetic engineering techniques.
4. Describe two major goals of the Human Genome Project.
5. Distinguish between proteomics and genomics.
6. Outline the different applications of biotechnology
7. List some techniques of genetic engineering.
8. Delineate the transgenic organisms and their significance.
9. Explain the procedure for the following
a. PCR
b. Gel electrophpresis
c. Gene therapy
10. Describe human genome project and its main goals.
11. Discuss the drastic environmental impacts of oil spills and how the microbes like bacteria
can help mitigate the problem.
12. Give an account of significance of transgenic organisms in food industry.
13. Describe the uses of DNA finger printing.
14. What is gene cloning?
15. Elaborately discuss recombinant DNA technology and its usefulness.
Answers:
1 a. Biotechnology: involves manipulating biological systems to generate useful products or to
improve environmental, medical or agricultural process.
b. Plasmid is a DNA molecule that is separated from the chromosome DNA and that can
replicate independently.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
c. Genetic engineering is the direct manipulation of an organism genes using biotechnology
d. Transformation is the process of importing free DNA in to the bacterial cell
2. Gene therapy and genetic engineering
3. Bioethics: is the study of ethical issue related to the DNA technology. Many scientist and
non-scientist are involved in identifying and addressing any ethical, legal, and social issues.
4. the first goal is to identifying all the genes in human DNA and second goal is to obtain the
sequences of three billion DNA base pairs that create the human DNA
5. Genomics is the study of an organism genome while proteomics is the study of the structure
and function of protein in human body.
6. medical application, environmental cleanup, agricultural application and bioethics.
7. some techniques of genetic engineering are:
Enzyme restriction, Gel electrophoresis, recombinant DNA technology, gene cloning,
DNA sequencing, polymerase chain reaction, DNA fingerprinting
8. Transgenic organisms are organisms which contain foreign DNA that has been introduced
using biotechnology.
Their significance _are important research tools and are often used when explored a genes
function.
9. a) PCR is a method of making many copies of a specific segment of DNA. PCR is used
forensic scientist, doctors and etc.
b) Gel electrophoresis is a common technique to separate different fragments of cut DNA
c) Gene therapy is the correcting muted genes that cause human disease
10. Human genome project was international research project that separated all the genes
found in human.
Its main goals identifying all the genes, obtain the sequence of DNA.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
11. When oils malformation or breaks thousands of tons of oils can seep into the environment,
then oil split effects on the environment and habitat and they can kill plant and animal.
12. Initially help protected crops by providing resistance to specific disease or insects, ensuring
greater food production.
13. Is used to establish a link between biological evidence and suspect in a criminal
investigation. It is also used to establishing paternity
14. Gene cloning is the multiple copies of the gene of interested can be produced using cloning
vectors.
15. Recombinant of DNA technology has an important to the productions of vaccines and protein
therapies such as insulin, interferon and human growth hormone. It is also used for production of
clotting factors for treating hemophilia.
Ch7: Answer the following questions:
1. Compare species diversity and genetic diversity.
2. List several reasons to value biodiversity.
3. How does the greenhouse effect occur?
4. Identify the primary causes of modern species extinctions.
5. Describe how pesticides, such as DDT, undergo the process of biological magnification.
6. Choose a species that might be affected by global warming, and predict how that species
might be affected.
7. Contrast conservation biology with restoration biology.
8. Explain why reserves protect biodiversity.
9. Explain causes and effects of acid rain
10. Give an account of the factors that threaten biodiversity.
Answers:
1. Species diversity: is the number of different species in a biological community while
Genetic diversity: is the variety of genes or inheritable characteristics that are present in
a population.
2. There are several reasons to preserve biodiversity. there are economic reason, aesthetic
reason, and scientific reasons for preserving biodiversity.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
3. Green house effects occur by converting light energy into heat energy. Green house
effects means is the natural process that warms the earth surfaces.
4. They are: overharvesting, pollution, deforestation or habitat destruction, climate changes,
diseases and etc.
5. The highest does of pesticides such as DDT in animals found in food chain.
Biomagnification means buildup of toxins in food chain.
6. Species effected by global warming include: snow leopard, giant panda, tiger and etc.
the key impact of global warming in some species is the habitat destruction and it leads to
extreme extinction.
7. Conservation biology is the management of earth's biodiversity with the aim of
protecting species, their habitats, and ecosystems while restoration biology is the
scientific study of repairing disturbed ecosystem through human intervention.
8. Reserves protect biodiversity: gives high priority to protect the wildlife, habitats, in
order to prevent disappearing on earth to ensure extinction.
9. Acid rain: is caused by a chemical reaction that begins when compounds like sulfur
oxides and nitrogen oxides are released into the air. Its effects are removes calcium,
potassium, and other nutrients from the soil, it damages plant tissues and slows their
growth.
10. The following are factors that threaten biodiversity: Overexploitation, Habitat loss,
Pollution and Eutrophication.
Other important questions
1. Biodiversity is defined as the variability among living organisms - animals, plants,
their habitats and their genes – its types are genetic diversity, species diversity and
ecosystem diversity.
2. Conservation: is the care and protection of natural resources.
3. Bio indicators: are living organism which are utilized to screen the health of the
natural ecosystem.
4. Conservation hotspots: are an area with large numbers of endemic species, in many
of which species are disappearing rapidly.
5. factors that threaten biodiversity:
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
I. Overexploitation: excessive use, of species that have economic value.
II. Habitat loss: There are several ways that species can lose their habitats
III. Eutrophication Another form of water pollution
6. Pollution: is the release of substances or forms of energy into the environment by
human activities. There are three main categories of pollution, namely air, water and
soil pollution.
7. Impacts of climate changes?
These impacts include: increased heat, drought, insects’ outbreaks, decline water
supplies, reduced agricultural yields, health impacts in cities and etc.
8. Causes of global warming: it’s caused by human activities, greenhouse gases,
deforestation and etc.
9. What are the health problems of water, soil and air pollution: includes respiratory
diseases, cancer, diarrheal diseases, cardiovascular diseases, tuberculosis, lungs
diseases, neurological disorders, kidneys or liver damage, reduced yield of crops and
etc.
10. What are causes of water, soil and air pollution?
Causes of air pollution are: Sulphur based chemicals, Oxides of Nitrogen, Smoke and Fumes,
Dust and Aerosols.
Causes of water pollution are: Domestic effluents, Industrial effluents, Heat, Oil Spillage, Agro-
chemicals, Lead, Mercury and Soil Erosion
Causes of soil pollution are: Oxides of sulphur, Aerosols, Petroleum products, Inorganic
fertilisers and Solid Waste.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
