Banadir zone primary and secondary schools
Biology form four:
Chapter questions and their answers.
Ch1: Answers all of the following questions for each pair of terms explain the
relationship between the terms:
1. a. Stimulants and depressants
b. Motor neuron and sensory receptor
c. Brain stem and diencephalon
d. Resting potential and action potential
• Stimulant: are drugs that speed up the activity of central nervous system while
depressant: are drugs slow down your brain function.
• Sensory receptor: relay information from external sensory receptors to the central
nervous system while motor neuron: relay information from the central nervous system
to the skeletal muscles.
• Brain stem: is the distal part of the brain that consists of midbrain, pons and medulla
oblongata while diencephalon is the region of the brain that connects cerebrum and
midbrain it consists of thalamus and hypothalamus.
• Resting potential is non-conducting nerve fibre while an action potential is a localized
change in the resting membrane potential B/w the inside and outside of the nerve fibre
caused by stimulus.
2. Use each of the following terms in a separate sentence neuron, dendrites, myelin sheath,
axon and synapse.
• Neurons: are the working units of the nervous system that generate and transmit nerve
impulse or is the basic functional unit of the nervous system.
• Dendrites: receives impulse from another neuron and carry toward cell body.
• Myelin sheath: is a fatty material that insulates the axon.
• Axons: carries nerve impulse away from cell body to other neuron and muscles.
• Synapse: is the junction between dendrites of two adjacent neurons.
3. Use each of the following terms in a separate sentence thalamus, hypothalamus, pons
and medulla oblongata.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
• Thalamus: consists of two masses of gray and white matter situated with in the cerebral
hemisphere just below the corpus callosum.
• Hypothalamus: is a small but important structure and it’s situated below the thalamus.
• Pons: is situated in front of the cerebellum, below the midbrain and above medulla
oblongata.
• Medulla oblongata: is the most interior region of the brain stem.
4. The word roots and origin the word pons is derived from the Latin pons, which means
bridge using this information explain how pons is an appropriate term for the part of the
brain it describes?
• The word of pons is the Latin word and important region of the brain that relay nerve
impulse from the forebrain to the cerebellum.
5. Discuss the structure of a neuron?
a. Dendrites: receives nerve impulse from other neuron and carry toward cell body.
b. Cell body: connects dendrites and axon also contains nucleus and cell organelles.
c. Axon: carry nerve impulse away from cell body to the other neurons and muscles.
d. Myelin sheath: insulates the axon.
e. Schwann cells: secretes myelin sheath.
f. Node of Ranvier: increases speed of impulse.
g. Axon terminal: is the end of axon contains vesicles full neurotransmitter
6. Describe the chemical conditions within neuron during resting potential and action
potential?
• Resting potential –there are more sodium ions outside the neuron and more potassium
inside neuron while Action potential-there are more potassium ions outside the neuron
and more sodium ions inside the neuron.
7. Explain how action potential are transmitted from neuron to another cell?
• Action potential- impulse travels the length of the axon and causes releases of
neurotransmitters into the synapse through which two neurons communicate.
8. Describes the roles of the two main organs of the central nervous system?
• Brain controls all functions of the body such as our thoughts, learning, memory, and
speech, temperature, water balance, sleep, appetite, heartbeat, respiration, sense organs
and etc. It also controls movements of the arms and legs.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
• Spinal cord: transfer nervous information between the brain and other parts of the body
except head region. It also controls simple reflex action.
9. Define the roles of four portions of the brain?
• Functions of Cerebrum: controls such activities: Memory, Thinking, Leaning, Problem
solving, Reasoning, and five senses and therefore controls voluntary movements.
• Functions of Diencephalon: Processing center for sensory information and autonomic
control. Regulates body temperature, water balance and metabolism, Regulates of
endocrine system. Controls: pleasure, fear, thirst, pain, and etc.
• Functions of Brain stem: Connecting cerebrum and cerebellum to the spinal cord.
Controls many involuntary functions such as: heart rate, breathing rate, body temperature,
sneezing vomiting, swallowing, coughing, digestion, sleep and etc.
• Functions of Cerebellum: Controls and coordinates muscular movements,
Maintenance body balance pasture and equilibrium
10. Summarize the roles of sensory and motor division of the peripheral nervous system?
• Sensory division of the PNS: carries sensory information from the body to the central
nervous system while Motor division of the PNS: carries nerve impulse from the central
nervous system to the muscles and glands.
11.Relate the relationship between motor neurons, interneurons and sensory receptors?
• Sensory neuron (afferent): get information about what is going on inside and outside of
the body and bring that information in to the brain and spinal cord.
• Motor neuron (efferent): get information from brain or spinal cord and convey to the
effector organs.
• Interneuron (relay neuron, connector, associative, intermediate): which are found only
in the brain and spinal cord, connect one neuron to another.
12.Describe the role of chemoreceptors in taste and smell?
Chemoreceptors: respond chemicals responsible for senses of taste and smell.
13. List five different types of sensory receptors in the human body?
• Receptors in the eye, receptors in the tongue, receptors in the nose, receptors in the ear,
receptors in the skin.
14.Identify the parts of the ear responsible for hearing and for balance?
• Cochlea responsible for hearing while semicircular canals responsible for balance.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
15.Compare how rods and cones response to light?
• Rods are light sensitive cells that are excited by low levels of light while Cone’s function
in bright light and provide information about color to the brain.
16.Describe how the eye receives light stimuli and sends a signal to the brain?
• The light first enter by cornea, pupil and the lens through vitreous humor in the retina the
photoreceptor cells called rods and cones send stimuli the brain via optic nerve.
17.State the types of receptors that function in taste and smell?
• Chemoreceptors
18.Explain the role of skin sensing touch, temperature and pain?
• Thousands of nerve endings in the skin respond to –touch, temperature and pain or there
are many receptors in the skin that respond touch, temperature and pain.
19.State the types and roles of the peripheral nervous system?
• Types of peripheral nervous system are cranial nerve and spinal nerves also sensory
nerves and motor nerves.
• Motor nerves are divided by somatic nervous system and autonomic nervous system.
The autonomic nervous system is classified into sympathetic and parasympathetic. 
Function of peripheral nervous system: its main function is to connect the CNS to the
rest of the body.
20.Outline the disease of the nervous system?
• Dementia
• Alzheimer disease
• Meningitis
• Poliomyelitis’s • Epilepsy and Stroke
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
Ch2: answer all of the following questions
1. How do the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland interact to control the release of some
of the hormones in the endocrine system?
2. List six major endocrine glands and the function of these glands.
3. How do feedback mechanisms help maintain homeostasis?
4. How do negative feedback mechanisms differ from positive feedback mechanisms?
5. Compare the effects of glucagon and insulin on blood glucose levels.
6. Name four functions of hormones.
7. How do endocrine glands differ from exocrine glands?
8. Explain how most amino acid–based hormones affect their target cells.
9. Explain how steroid and thyroid hormones affect their target cells.
10. Explain why the pancreas is considered to be both an exocrine gland and an endocrine
gland.
11. Why pituitary gland is called the master gland?
12. Describe the conditions of gigantism and dwarfism, their causes and treatment methods.
13. Identify and describe the type of feedback mechanism operating in the diagram shown
below.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
Answers:
1. Hypothalamus and pituitary gland control the initial release of many hormones for the
endocrine system.
2.
• Pituitary gland: secrete a number of hormones that regulate a number of another
endocrine gland
• Pancreases: produce glucagon and insulin that regulate the level of sugar in the
blood
• Thyroid gland: produce thyroid hormone to regulate cellular metabolic rate,
heart rate blood pressure and etc.
• Parathyroid gland: produce parathyroid hormone that regulate too low of blood
calcium level
• Adrenal gland: produce hormone that regulate metabolism, immune system,
blood pressure and stress.
• Gonads: produce gametes and sex hormones
3. Feedback mechanism control hormone secretion
4. Negative feedback: is the last step in a series of events in habits the initial signal in the
series while positive feedback: is the release of initial hormone stimulates the release or
production of other hormones.
5. Glucagon stimulates release of glucose in to the blood stream while insulin lowers the
blood sugar levels.
6. Four main function of hormones are:
• Regulate body growth and development
• Regulate metabolism, reproduction and urine production
7. Endocrine glands: their hormones diffuse directly into the bloodstream while exocrine
glands: secrete substances through ducts (tube-like structures).
8. Amino acid hormones: must bind to receptors found on the plasma membrane of a target
cell because they cannot diffuse through the plasma membrane.
9. Steroid hormones are soluble in lipids and therefore can diffuse through the plasma
membrane of a target cell.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
10. Because pancreas release pancreatic hormone through the duct and secrete glucagon and
insulin in to the blood stream.
11. Because controls all the activities of endocrine glands.
12. In children who are still growing, too low growth hormone can cause a condition called
dwarfism. Can be controlled by injection synthetic growth hormone.
In children who are still growing, too much growth hormone can cause a condition
called gigantism. Can be controlled by surgery and medication.
13. Is the negative feedback and is a vital control mechanism for the body’s homeostasis.
Ch 3: ANSWER ALL OF THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS
1. Differentiate between
a. axial and appendicular skeletons,
b. bone and cartilage
c. exoskeleton and endoskeleton.
2. Describe the shapes of bones and bone formation.
3. Draw a labeled diagram of the structure of a long bone.
4. Identify the types of joints with respect to form and function.
5. Outline the functions of skeletal system.
6. Describe arthritis. What are the two common forms of arthritis? And which type of
arthritis is not related to age?
7. For healthy bones, sun exposure is advised, justify that.
8. What is osteoporosis?
9. What is the significance of synovial fluids?
10. What are the major kinds of joints in the human body?
11. Define ossification?
12. Compare between the types of muscles with respect to form and function.
13. Describe microscopic structure of striated muscle fibers.
14. Explain the mechanism of muscular contraction or the sliding filament theory.
15. Give an account of the common muscle injuries inflicted on football players.
16. Differentiate between fast-twitch and slow-twitch muscle
17. Contrast the functions of flexors and extensors.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
18. What causes muscles to become fatigued? And why do you think the heart muscle never
suffers from fatigue?
19. Explain briefly the structure and function of the skin
20. Describe the derivatives of skin
21. Identify two types of glands found in the skin, and describe their functions.
22. Describe the structure of nails and hairs.
23. Recognize the diseases and disorders of integumentary system
24. Identify the substance that prevents the hair and skin from drying out, and the gland
where this substance is produced.
Answers:
1. a) Axial skeleton is the part of the skeletal that consists of skull, vertebral column, ribs
and the sternum.
Appendicular skeleton is the part of skeleton that consists of bones of the shoulder,
arms, hands, hips, legs and feet
b) Bone is defined as connective tissue that has many shapes and size.
Cartilage is an elastic supportive tissue that consisting of specialized cells called
Chondrocytes
c) Exoskeleton are external to the soft tissues while Endoskeleton are internal.
2. Shapes of bones are long bone, short bone, irregular bone, flat bone and sesamoid bone
Formation of bone involves replacement of cartilage with bonny tissue
3.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
4. Fixed joint prevent movement
Semi-movable joints permit only limited movement.
All other joints in the body are movable joints.
5. a. Support
b. protection
c. formation of blood cells
d. Reservoir
e. Movement
6. Arthritis is an inflammation of the joint. The two common forms of arthritis are:
Osteoarthritis and Rheumatoid. Rheumatoid arthritis is not related to age
7. Sunlight: help bones for keeping the immune system health too and formation of vitamin D.
8. Osteoporosis is the condition in which bones become weak and break easily.
9. Synovial fluid reduce friction between joint during movement
10. Major kinds of joints are: a. Fixed joint b. Semi movable joint c. movable joint
11. the formation of bone from osteoblast is called Ossification
12. Skeletal muscle: Is voluntary muscle responsible for body movement
Cardiac muscle is involuntary muscle that pumps blood through the body
Smooth muscle is the involuntary muscle that protect internal organs
13. Sarcomere
14. Myosin have extensions shaped like oval “heads while actin filaments look like a twisted
strand of breads.
15. Muscle cramps, muscle fatigue, muscle strain, muscle tearing, and etc.
16. Slow twitch fibers have a rich capillary, more mitochondria and aerobic respiratory enzyme
and high concentration of myoglobin while Fast twitch fibers have fewer capillary and
mitochondria, not much myoglobin and aerobically respire
17. flexors is a muscle that pends a joint while extensor is a muscle that straightens a joint
18. impaired blood flow, iron imbalance and nerve fatigue.
Because cardiac muscle contains more mitochondria
19. Structure of the skin are dermis and epidermis while function of the skin is protection,
regulation of body temperature, formation of vitamin D, sensation, Excretion
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
20. Skin derivatives are: Sweat glands, Oil glands, Hairs, Nails.
21. Sebaceous or oil gland and Sweat glands.
• Sebaceous gland is oil secreting gland softening hair and skin.
• Sweat gland releases excessive water
22. Hair is made up of follicle, root and shaft While nails are made up of free edge, nail plate,
cuticle and lunula
23. Disorders in integumentary system include: Eczema, Acne, Seborrheic, Psoriasis, Cold sores
and etc.
24. Substance that prevents the hair and skin from drying out is Oil sebum and it is produced
from Sebaceous or Oil gland.
Ch4: Answer the following questions:
1. Name the three parts of a nucleotide.
2. State the base-pairing rules in DNA.
3. A template strand of DNA has the following sequence:
3′ – CGTTACCCGAGCCGTACGATTAGG – 5′
Use the sequence information to determine
a. The predicted sequence of the mRNA for this gene.
b. The predicted amino acid sequence of the protein.
4. What is the meaning of: genetic code, codon, anticodon, intron, exon, transcription and
translation?
5. Compare types of RNA according structure and function
6. Describe the role of helicases and DNA polymerases during DNA replication.
7. State why DNA replication is a semiconservative process.
8. Summarize the flow of genetic information.
9. Sequence the main steps of transcription.
10. List the four ways in which the structure of RNA differs from that of DNA.
Prepared by Hamdi Hassan Hashi
